Add v0.27.0 release notes (#1507)
loadimpact/k6: release notes/v0.27.0.md

k6 v0.27.0 is here! :tada:

This is a milestone release containing a major overhaul to the execution subsystem of k6, along with many improvements and bug fixes.

## New features and enhancements!

### New execution engine ([#1007](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1007))

After 1.5 years in the making, the k6 team is proud to release the first public version of the new execution engine, offering users new ways of modeling advanced load testing scenarios that can more closely represent real-world traffic patterns.

These new scenarios are entirely optional, and existing k6 scripts and options should continue to work the same as before (with a few minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes)), but please [create a bug issue](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/new?labels=bug&template=bug_report.md) if that's not the case.

See the [documentation](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/scenarios) for details and examples, or keep reading for the summary.

#### Execution scenarios

> Some of the currently possible scenarios were formalized into standalone executors:

Author: Why the "New executors" change? I thought we would promote "scenarios" over "executors", as that's easier to understand for people unfamiliar with this feature.

> Some of the currently possible scenarios were formalized into standalone executors:

Reviewer: Well, we tackle scenarios below. And here we talk about executor types, which you use in scenarios with `executor: whatever`... Though maybe "New executors" is not the best possible section title, I can't think of a better one :man_shrugging:

> Some of the currently possible scenarios were formalized into standalone executors:

Author: Yeah, you're right, it does make more sense within this context.

- `ramping-arrival-rate`: a variable number of iterations are executed in a specified period of time. This is similar to the ramping VUs executor, but instead of specifying how many VUs should loop through the script at any given point in time, the iterations per second k6 should execute at that point in time can be specified.

It's important to also note that all of these executors, except the `externally-controlled` one, can be used both in local k6 execution with `k6 run`, and in the distributed cloud execution with `k6 cloud`. This even includes "old" executors that were previously unavailable in the cloud, like the `shared-iterations` one. Now, you can execute something like `k6 cloud --iterations 10000 --vus 100 script.js` without any issues.

#### Execution improvements

Multiple execution scenarios can now be configured in a single test run via the new `scenarios` option. These scenarios can run both sequentially and in parallel, and can independently execute different script functions, have different executor types and execution options, and have custom environment variables and metrics tags.

> An example using 2 scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example using 3 scenarios:
```

```js

> import http from 'k6/http';
> import { fail } from 'k6';
> 
> export let options = {
>   discardResponseBodies: true,
>   scenarios: {
>     my_web_test: {
>       executor: 'constant-vus',
>       exec: 'webtest',
>       vus: 50,
>       duration: '30s',
>       tags: { my_test_version: 'v2' },
>       env: { TESTVERSION: 'v2' },
>     },
>     my_api_test: {
>       executor: 'ramping-arrival-rate',
>       exec: 'apitest',
>       startTime: '30s',
>       startRate: 50,
>       timeUnit: '1s',
>       preAllocatedVUs: 50,
>       maxVUs: 100,
>       stages: [
>         { target: 200, duration: '30s' },
>         { target: 0, duration: '30s' },
>       ],
>       tags: { my_test_version: 'v1' },
>       env: { TESTVERSION: 'v1' },
>     },
>   }
> };
> 
> export function webtest() {
>   if (__ENV.TESTVERSION != 'v2') fail();
>   http.get('https://test.k6.io/contacts.php');
> }
> 
> export function apitest() {
>   if (__ENV.TESTVERSION != 'v1') fail();
>   http.get('https://test-api.k6.io/');
> }

Reviewer: I think `fail()` will only confuse people here and is superfluous 

```suggestion
import http from 'k6/http';
import { sleep } from 'k6';

export let options = {
    scenarios: {
        my_web_test: { // some arbitrary scenario name
            executor: 'constant-vus',
            vus: 50,
            duration: '5m',
            gracefulStop: "0s", // do not wait for iterations to finish in the end
            tags: { test_type: 'website' }, // extra tags for the metrics generated by this scenario
            exec: 'webtest', // the function this scenario will execute
        },
        my_api_test_1: {
            executor: 'constant-arrival-rate',
            rate: 90, timeUnit: '1m', // 90 iterations per minute, i.e. 1.5 RPS
            duration: '5m',
            preAllocatedVUs: 10, // the size of the VU (i.e. worker) pool for this scenario

            tags: { test_type: 'api' }, // different extra metric tags for this scenario
            env: { MY_CROC_ID: '1' }, // and we can specify extra environment variables as well!
            exec: 'apitest', // this scenario is executing different code than the one above!
        },
        my_api_test_2: {
            executor: 'ramping-arrival-rate',
            startTime: '30s', // the ramping API test starts a little later
            startRate: 50, timeUnit: '1s', // we start at 50 iterations per second
            stages: [
                { target: 200, duration: '30s' }, // go from 50 to 200 iters/s in the first 30 seconds
                { target: 200, duration: '3m30s' }, // hold at 200 iters/s for 3.5 minutes
                { target: 0, duration: '30s' }, // ramp down back to 0 iters/s over the last 30 second
            ],
            preAllocatedVUs: 50, // how large the initial pool of VUs would be
            maxVUs: 100, // if the preAllocatedVUs are not enough, we can initialize more

            tags: { test_type: 'api' }, // different extra metric tags for this scenario
            env: { MY_CROC_ID: '2' }, // same function, different environment variables
            exec: 'apitest', // this scenario is executing different code than the one above!
        },
    },
    discardResponseBodies: true,
    thresholds: {
        // we can set different thresholds for the different scenarios because
        // of the extra metric tags we set!
        "http_req_duration{test_type:api}": ["p(95)<250", "p(99)<350"],
        "http_req_duration{test_type:website}": ["p(99)<500"],
        // we can reference the scenario names as well
        "http_req_duration{scenario:my_api_test_2}": ["p(99)<300"],
    }
};

export function webtest() {
    http.get('https://test.k6.io/contacts.php');
    sleep(Math.random() * 2);
}

export function apitest() {
    http.get(`https://test-api.k6.io/public/crocodiles/${__ENV.MY_CROC_ID}/`);
    // no need for sleep() here, the iteration pacing will be controlled by the
    // arrival-rate executors above!
}
```

```

As shown in the example above and the [documentation](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/scenarios), all executors have some additional options that improve their flexibility and facilitate code reuse, especially in multi-scenario test runs:

> - Each executor has a `startTime` property, which defines at what time relative to the test run start it will start executing. In the above example, the `my_api_test` scenario will start after `my_web_test` completes.

Reviewer: I think that code comments will be cleaner and easier to follow, compared to references from this list to the script above

```suggestion
- Each executor has a `startTime` property, which defines at what time, relative to the beginning of the whole test run, the scenario will start being executed. 
```

- A new method to stop engine execution via the REST API ([#1352](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1352)). Thanks @hynd!

## Bugs fixed!
- CLI: Stop `--http-debug` from exiting k6 on request dump error ([#1402](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1402)). Thanks @berndhartzer!
- CLI: JSON output is now less noisy ([#1469](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1469)). Thanks @michiboo!
- CLI: k6 doesn't exit when using `iterations` with `stages` ([#812](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/812)).
- CLI: Mismatch in check counts in the end-of-test summary ([#1033](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1033)).
- Config: Better validation of `stages` ([#875](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/875)).
- JS: Rare panics in goja ([#867](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/867)).
- HTTP: Fix request timeout and wrong context used for pushing metrics ([#1260](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1260)).
- Execution: Fix sometimes skipping iterations with a `context cancelled` error when rapidly ramping up and down ([#1283](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1283)).

> - WebSockets: Fix possible connection hanging when the main context is cancelled ([#1260](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1542)).

Reviewer 2: maybe also mention that:
1. now there are less goroutine leaks around 1542 and https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1513
2. that we've updated the ws lib which should add up to some minuscule performance increase  https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1515

also the number of the PR is wrong ;)

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1367 this also hasn't been in a release

Author: See 6236f14b.

I put the WS lib update under "Internals" since it's not really a bug fix.

> also the number of the PR is wrong ;)

I would rather link to issues than PRs, as those usually describe the problem, and sometimes link to other related issues. Except when the PR doesn't have an issue, but we we should always try to create one for tracking and discussion purposes.

> 

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1439 this is probably something that can be mentioned under UX
https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1540 this as well

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1544 is a must :D maybe even link this https://community.k6.io/t/share-of-date-file-by-all-vus/407/5?u=mstoykov or ... maybe I should write a proper example with the new code ...

Author: See 6236f14b.

I didn't mention #1540 under UX since this is already mentioned in the breaking changes, though we didn't link to this issue. Let me know if you don't mind mentioning it twice, or if just linking to #1540 in the "Breaking changes" would be enough.

I'm not sure it would be beneficial to link to that forum post, it would just confuse people since that's no longer the optimal approach. Could you add a new example to the k6-docs PR and then link it in that forum thread (when it's merged) as a heads up?

Reviewer 2: will try to do it today

}

export function apitest() {
  if (__ENV.TESTVERSION != 'v1') fail();
  http.get('https://test-api.k6.io/');
}
```

As shown in the example above and the [documentation](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/scenarios), all executors have some additional options that improve their flexibility and facilitate code reuse, especially in multi-scenario test runs:
- Each executor has a `startTime` property, which defines at what time relative to the test run start it will start executing. In the above example, the `my_api_test` scenario will start after `my_web_test` completes.
- Executors have a new `gracefulStop` property that allows for iterations to complete gracefully for some amount of time after the normal executor duration is over ([#879](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/879), [#1033](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1033)). The `ramping-vus` executor additionally also has `gracefulRampDown`, to give iterations time to finish when VUs are ramped down. The default value for both options is `30s`, so it's a slight breaking change, but the old behavior of immediately interrupting iterations can easily be restored by setting these options to `0s`.

> - The new `--execution-segment` and `--execution-segment-sequence` options allow easy partitioning of test runs across multiple k6 instances. Initially this applies to configuration options like number of VUs or iterations, but opens the door to test data partitioning, an often requested feature. See [#997](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/997) for more details.

Reviewer: This should be a separate paragraph
```suggestion
```

- Different executors can execute different functions other than the `default` exported one. This can be specified by the `exec` option in each `scenarios` config, and allows for more flexibility in organizing your tests, easier code reuse, building test suites, etc.
- To allow for even greater script flexibility and code reuse, you can specify different environment variables and tags in each scenario, via the new `env` and `tags` executor options respectively.
- k6 will now emit a new `dropped_iterations` metric in `shared-iterations`, `per-vu-iterations`, `constant-arrival-rate` and `ramping-arrival-rate` executors if it can't schedule an iteration on time, depending on the configured rates and the iteration duration ([#1529](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1529)).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We've also introduced new `--execution-segment` and `--execution-segment-sequence` options, which allow for relatively easy partitioning of test runs across multiple k6 instances. Initially this applies to the test execution (all new executor types are supported!), but opens the door to test data partitioning, an often requested feature. See [#997](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/997) for more details.

```

- The k6 REST API for controlling script execution (i.e. the `k6 pause`, `k6 scale` commands) now only works when a `externally-controlled` executor is configured in the `scenarios` config. The initial pausing of a test (i.e. `k6 run --paused script.js`) still works with all executor types, but once the test is started with `k6 resume` (or the corresponding REST API call), it can't be paused again unless only the `externally-controlled` executor is used.

- Previously, running a script with `k6 run --paused script.js` would have still executed the script's `setup()` function (if it was present and wasn't explicitly disabled with `--no-setup`) and paused immediately after. Now, k6 will pause before it executes `setup()`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Previously, if you ramped down and ramped up VUs via `stages`, the `__VU` global variables would have been incremented on the ramp-ups. This will no longer happen, the max value of `__VU` across a test run will never exceed the number of initialized VUs.

```

k6 v0.27.0 is here! :tada:

This is a milestone release containing a major overhaul to the execution subsystem of k6, along with many improvements and bug fixes.

## New features and enhancements!

### New execution engine ([#1007](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1007))

After 1.5 years in the making, the k6 team is proud to release the first public version of the new execution engine, offering users new ways of modeling advanced load testing scenarios that can more closely represent real-world traffic patterns.

> These new scenarios are entirely optional, and existing k6 scripts and options should continue to work the same as before (with a few minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes)), but please [create a new issue](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/new?labels=bug&template=bug_report.md) if that's not the case and there's a bug.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These new scenarios are entirely optional, and the vast majority of existing k6 scripts and options should continue to work the same as before. There are several minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes)) and fixes of previously undefined behavior, but please [create a new issue](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/new?labels=bug&template=bug_report.md) if you find some issue we haven't explicitly noted as a breaking change.
```

#### Execution scenarios and executor options

Multiple execution scenarios can now be configured in a single test run via the new `scenarios` option. These scenarios can run both sequentially and in parallel, and can independently execute different script functions, have different executor types and execution options, and have custom environment variables and metrics tags.

An example using 3 scenarios:

```js
import http from 'k6/http';
import { sleep } from 'k6';

export let options = {
    scenarios: {
        my_web_test: { // some arbitrary scenario name
            executor: 'constant-vus',
            vus: 50,
            duration: '5m',
            gracefulStop: '0s', // do not wait for iterations to finish in the end
            tags: { test_type: 'website' }, // extra tags for the metrics generated by this scenario
            exec: 'webtest', // the function this scenario will execute
        },
        my_api_test_1: {
            executor: 'constant-arrival-rate',
            rate: 90, timeUnit: '1m', // 90 iterations per minute, i.e. 1.5 RPS
            duration: '5m',

>             preAllocatedVUs: 10, // the size of the VU (i.e. worker) pool for this scenario

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            preAllocatedVUs: 10, // the size of the VU (i.e. worker) pool for this scenario
            maxVUs: 10, // we don't want to allocate more VUs mid-test in this scenario
```

- Executors have a new `gracefulStop` property that allows for iterations to complete gracefully for some amount of time after the normal executor duration is over ([#879](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/879), [#1033](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1033)). The `ramping-vus` executor additionally also has `gracefulRampDown`, to give iterations time to finish when VUs are ramped down. The default value for both options is `30s`, so it's a slight breaking change, but the old behavior of immediately interrupting iterations can easily be restored by setting these options to `0s`.
- Different executors can execute different functions other than the `default` exported one. This can be specified by the `exec` option in each `scenarios` config, and allows for more flexibility in organizing your tests, easier code reuse, building test suites, etc.
- To allow for even greater script flexibility and code reuse, you can specify different environment variables and tags in each scenario, via the new `env` and `tags` executor options respectively.

> - k6 will now emit a new `dropped_iterations` metric in `shared-iterations`, `per-vu-iterations`, `constant-arrival-rate` and `ramping-arrival-rate` executors if it can't schedule an iteration on time, depending on the configured rates and the iteration duration ([#1529](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1529)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- k6 may now emit a new `dropped_iterations` metric in the `shared-iterations`, `per-vu-iterations`, `constant-arrival-rate` and `ramping-arrival-rate` executors; this is done if it can't run an iteration on time, depending on the configured rates (for the arrival-rate executors) or scenario `maxDuration` (for the iteration-based executors), so it's generally a sign of a poor config or an overloaded system under test ([#1529](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1529)).
```

## Internals

- As mentioned above, [#1007](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/1007) was almost a complete re-write of the execution scheduling parts of k6. This involved deep architectural changes in how test runs are executed and improved overall code coverage by around 2%.
- Switched to Go 1.14 for building and testing k6, bringing some fixes and performance improvements.
- WebSockets: Updated gorilla/websocket library bringing minor performance improvements ([#1515](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1515)).
- Code cleanup and formatting. Thanks @thinkerou!

## Breaking changes

- Execution config options (`scenarios`, `stages`, `iterations`, `duration`) from "upper" config layers overwrite execution options from "lower" (i.e. CLI flags > environment variables > JS options > JSON options) config layers. For example, the `--iterations` CLI flag will overwrite any execution options set as environment variables (e.g. `K6_DURATION`, `K6_STAGES`, etc.) or script options (`stages: [ /* ... */]`, `scenarios: { /* ... */ }`, etc. ).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Previously, if the `iterations` and `vus` script options were specified, but `duration` was not, the script could have ran practically indefinitely, given a sufficiently large number or length of the used iterations. There was no implicit or explicit time limit, one of the reasons this execution pattern was not allowed in `k6 cloud` test runs before. From k6 v0.27.0, by default, if the specified iterations haven't finished, these scripts will abort after 10 minutes, the default `maxDuration` value of `shared-iterations` executors. This default value can easily be changed by either setting the `maxDuration` option in the corresponding `scenarios` entry, or, if just the execution shortcuts were used to run the script, by setting the `duration` / `--duration` / `K6_DURATION` script option.

```

After 1.5 years in the making, the k6 team is proud to release the first public version of the new execution engine, offering users new ways of modeling advanced web testing scenarios that can more closely represent real-world traffic patterns.

These new scenarios are entirely optional, and existing k6 scripts and options should continue to work the same as before (with a few minor breaking changes, see below), but please [create a bug issue](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/issues/new?labels=bug&template=bug_report.md) if that's not the case.

See the [documentation](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/executors) for details and examples, or keep reading for the summary.

#### Execution scenarios

Some of the currently possible scenarios were formalized into standalone executors:

- Shared iterations: a fixed number of iterations are "shared" by all VUs, and the test ends once all iterations are executed. This scenario was possible with the previous `vus` and `iterations` options.
- Constant VUs: a fixed number of VUs execute as many iterations as possible for a specified amount of time. This scenario was possible with the previous `vus` and `duration` options.

> - Ramping VUs: a variable number of VUs execute as many iterations as possible for a specified amount of time. This scenario was possible with the previous `stages` option.

Author: What do you think about "This scenario is equivalent to the global ... options."? I think a bit of repetition is fine in this case to point out the equivalent "legacy" options for each case, even though we won't be removing them anytime soon (at all?).

> - Ramping VUs: a variable number of VUs execute as many iterations as possible for a specified amount of time. This scenario was possible with the previous `stages` option.

Reviewer 2: I think "This executor ..." is better. 

I don't think we have any plans to remove the "shortcut" options :D

> - Ramping VUs: a variable number of VUs execute as many iterations as possible for a specified amount of time. This scenario was possible with the previous `stages` option.

Author: Resolved in `f7286ca7`.

- Externally controlled: control and scale execution at runtime via k6's REST API or the CLI.

And new executors were added to support some of the most frequently requested scenarios that were previously difficult or impossible to model:

> - Per VU iterations: each VU executes a fixed number of iterations.

Author: Resolved in `f7286ca7`. @na-- Any other issues we should mention here?

- Constant arrival rate: a fixed number of iterations are executed in a specified period of time. This allows k6 to dynamically change the amount of VUs during a test run to achieve the specified amount of iterations per period, which is useful for a more accurate representation of RPS, for example. See #550 for details.
- Ramping arrival rate: a variable number of iterations are executed in a specified period of time. This is similar to the ramping VUs executor, but for iterations instead.

#### Execution improvements

- Several executors can be configured in a single test run, both sequentially and in parallel (closes #239).
- Each executor has a `startTime` property, which defines at what time relative to the test run start it will start executing.
- Executors have a new `gracefulStop` property that allows for iterations to complete gracefully for some amount of time after the normal executor duration is over (closes #879); even with `gracefulStop=0`, i.e. the old behavior, metrics are emitted and processed in a much saner way (closes #1033).

> - The new `execution-segment` options allow easy partitioning of test runs across multiple k6 instances. Initially this applies to configuration options like number of VUs or iterations, but opens the door to test data partitioning, an often requested feature. See #997 for more details.

Author: :smile: I thought it would be redundant so I mentioned it as "options" and not "option". But sure, I'll add it.

> - The new `execution-segment` options allow easy partitioning of test runs across multiple k6 instances. Initially this applies to configuration options like number of VUs or iterations, but opens the door to test data partitioning, an often requested feature. See #997 for more details.

Author: Resolved in `f7286ca7`.

- Different executors can execute different functions other than the `default` exported one. This offers more flexibility for organizing your tests, building test suites, etc.

> - Different executors can have different environment variables or tags.

Author: Resolved in `f7286ca7`.

## UX

- CLI: There are separate descriptions and real-time thread-safe progress bars for each individual executor.
- A new method to stop engine execution via the REST API (#1352). Thanks @hynd!

## Bugs fixed!
- The new execution engine by itself squashed a lot of bugs: [Do we have a full list of these? Issues that link to #1007?]
- CLI: Stop `--http-debug` from exiting k6 on request dump error (#1402). Thanks @berndhartzer!
- CLI: JSON output is now less noisy (#1469). Thanks @michiboo!
- CLI: k6 doesn't exit when using `iterations` with `stages` (#812).
- CLI: Mismatch in check counts in the end-of-test summary (#1033).
- Config: Better validation of `stages` (#875).
- JS: Rare panics in goja (#867).
- HTTP: Fix request timeout and wrong context used for pushing metrics (#1260).

## Internals

- Switched to Go 1.14 for building and testing k6, bringing some fixes and performance improvements.
- Code cleanup and formatting. Thanks @thinkerou!

## Breaking changes

> 

Reviewer: reminder to add https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1501/commits/c5ab552470290e2e52cf7f09ad1d141a2c8f4e2f

Author: Resolved in `f7286ca7`.

- The k6 REST API for controlling script execution (i.e. the `k6 pause`, `k6 scale` commands) now only works when a `externally-controlled` executor is configured in the `scenarios` config. The initial pausing of a test (i.e. `k6 run --paused script.js`) still works with all executor types, but once the test is started with `k6 resume` (or the corresponding REST API call), it can't be paused again unless only the `externally-controlled` executor is used.

- Previously, running a script with `k6 run --paused script.js` would have still executed the script's `setup()` function (if it was present and wasn't explicitly disabled with `--no-setup`) and paused immediately after. Now, k6 will pause before it executes `setup()`.

- The `vusMax` / `K6_VUS_MAX` / ` -m` / `--max` option is deprecated - it was previously used for the control of the initialized VUs by the REST API. Since that has now been restricted to the `externally-controlled` executor, the equivalent option there is called `maxVUs`.

- Tests with infinite duration are now only possible via the `externally-controlled` executor.

> - Previously, all iterations were interruptible - as soon as the specified `duration` expired, or when VUs were ramped down in a stage, any running iterations were interrupted. Now all executors besides the `externally-controlled` one have a `gracefulStop` period of `30s` by default (closes #898). Additionally, the `ramping-vus` executor has a `gracefulRampDown` parameter that configures the ramp-down grace period. For those periods, no new iterations will be started by the executors, but any currently running iterations will be allowed up to the specified periods to finish their execution.

Reviewer 2: This is probably ... a bug ? (or to keep it the same as before 1007), but the `externally-controlled` executor does call gracefulStop if it's pausing vus ... 
cc @na--

Author: I'll fallback to @na-- on how to reword this, as I just copied it from 1007.

Reviewer: hmm it's a bit tricky - the `externally-controlled` executor doesn't have `gracefulStop` as an option... but it's true that when you pause it, it calls the `vuHandle.gracefulStop()` method. This was done to preserve the logic of how "pausing" worked in the old k6, which didn't interrupt any running iterations, it just stopped k6 from making new iterations, i.e. what `gracefulStop` does: https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/blob/459da79ef51b37e5eaba4575c9065d9e592e5c49/core/local/local.go#L234-L250

so, I think the sentence here is technically correct... also, I think this whole paragraph should be more prominent, i.e. moved somewhere on top of the breaking changes, in second place perhaps?

Author: I moved this higher up, but maybe we should explain why the `externally-controlled` executor doesn't have the option? We mention it here and it the new docs, but it's never explained.

Since it's technically still using `vuHandle.gracefulStop()` it would make sense to be able to define this value in the config too. Avoiding special cases is always good if possible. :)

Reviewer: Calling `vuHandle.gracefulStop()` is very much not the same thing as the `gracefulStop` option. It just means "don't start more iterations with this VU", whereas the option the `gracefulStop` option implies "don't start new iterations _and_ call `hardStop` after this period, if an iteration was still running".

And yes, if there's a sufficiently high demand for it, we could probably implement support for the `gracefulStop` option in the `externally-controlled` executor as well. As to why we haven't, it's because of a couple of reasons:
- the externally controlled executor is pretty much the least important executor of them all, for now, it exists mostly because of keeping _some_ backwards compatibility and because it might be useful to a small number of people
- users of the `externally-controlled` executor can achieve exactly the same result pretty easily with just the k6 REST API, if they want to - instead of directly setting the running VUs to 0, you can first run `k6 pause`, wait 30 seconds (or however long you want to give VUs to finish gracefully), and then set the active VUs to `0` - hey, presto, you have `gracefulStop` :smile: 

Though you are right, that second fact is probably worth mentioning in the docs, though probably not in the release notes

Reviewer 2: Well, they can't have something like going down from 100 to 50 VUs gracefully ... but to be honest I don't like the `externally-controlled` executor and unless there is demand I am for *not* touching it :D

- Constant VUs: a fixed number of VUs execute as many iterations as possible for a specified amount of time. This executor is equivalent to the global `vus` and `duration` options.
- Ramping VUs: a variable number of VUs execute as many iterations as possible for a specified amount of time. This executor is equivalent to the global `stages` option.
- Externally controlled: control and scale execution at runtime via k6's REST API or the CLI.

And new executors were added to support some of the most frequently requested scenarios that were previously difficult or impossible to model:

- Per VU iterations: each VU executes a fixed number of iterations (#381).
- Constant arrival rate: a fixed number of iterations are executed in a specified period of time. This allows k6 to dynamically change the amount of VUs during a test run to achieve the specified amount of iterations per period, which is useful for a more accurate representation of RPS, for example. See #550 for details.
- Ramping arrival rate: a variable number of iterations are executed in a specified period of time. This is similar to the ramping VUs executor, but for iterations instead.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

It's important to also note that all of these executors, except the `externally-controlled` one, can be used both in local k6 execution with `k6 run`, and in the distributed cloud execution with `k6 cloud`. This even includes "old" executors that were previously unavailable in the cloud, like the `shared-iterations` one. Now, you can execute something like `k6 cloud --iterations 10000 --vus 100 script.js` without any issues.

```

Reviewer 2: Maybe additionally add that there is a default maxDuration of 10min in this case?

Reviewer 2: hm Iwould also consider this to be a breaking change as well - if you previously calld `k6 run -i 10000 -u 5 script.js` and it took 10h that would be fine, but now it will get stopped after 10minutes (and 30 seconds)

#### Execution improvements

- Several executors can be configured in a single test run, both sequentially and in parallel (closes #239).
- Each executor has a `startTime` property, which defines at what time relative to the test run start it will start executing.
- Executors have a new `gracefulStop` property that allows for iterations to complete gracefully for some amount of time after the normal executor duration is over (closes #879); even with `gracefulStop=0`, i.e. the old behavior, metrics are emitted and processed in a much saner way (closes #1033).

> - The new `--execution-segment` and `--execution-segment-sequence` options allow easy partitioning of test runs across multiple k6 instances. Initially this applies to configuration options like number of VUs or iterations, but opens the door to test data partitioning, an often requested feature. See #997 for more details.

Author: You mean moving it as a paragraph after the list? This was originally a list of "Execution improvements", but since we added the example, I guess it doesn't make sense anymore. The same goes for the new `dropped_iterations` item, I guess.

Not sure, let me know what you prefer. :)

- Different executors can execute different functions other than the `default` exported one. This offers more flexibility for organizing your tests, building test suites, etc.
- Different executors can have different environment variables and tags.

> 

Author: Let me know if 252fe203 is detailed enough.

We should probably mention this in k6-docs somewhere as well, maybe with an example. Any ideas on the best place for it?

> 

Reviewer: `iteration duration` should probably be `scenario duration` there... regarding the best place for it, I'll do another top to bottom read through of the whole document and get back to you, in a separate review to keep things clean, so I'm resolving this

## UX

- CLI: There are separate descriptions and real-time thread-safe progress bars for each individual executor.
- A new method to stop engine execution via the REST API (#1352). Thanks @hynd!

## Bugs fixed!
- CLI: Stop `--http-debug` from exiting k6 on request dump error (#1402). Thanks @berndhartzer!
- CLI: JSON output is now less noisy (#1469). Thanks @michiboo!
- CLI: k6 doesn't exit when using `iterations` with `stages` (#812).
- CLI: Mismatch in check counts in the end-of-test summary (#1033).
- Config: Better validation of `stages` (#875).
- JS: Rare panics in goja (#867).
- HTTP: Fix request timeout and wrong context used for pushing metrics (#1260).

> 

Reviewer: Also, we should probably mention the websocket bugfix that @MStoykov did https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1548

Author: Done in 6f440313.

## Internals

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- As mentioned above, #1007 was almost a complete re-write of the execution scheduling parts of k6. This involved deep architectural changes in how test runs are executed and improved overall code coverage by around 2%.
```
```

- Switched to Go 1.14 for building and testing k6, bringing some fixes and performance improvements.
- Code cleanup and formatting. Thanks @thinkerou!

## Breaking changes

- Execution config options (`scenarios`, `stages`, `iterations`, `duration`) from "upper" config layers overwrite execution options from "lower" (i.e. CLI flags > environment variables > JS options > JSON options) config layers. For example, the `--iterations` CLI flag will overwrite any execution options set as environment variables (e.g. `K6_DURATION`, `K6_STAGES`, etc.) or script options (`stages: [ /* ... */]`, `scenarios: { /* ... */ }`, etc. ).

> - Using different execution config options on the same level is now a configuration conflict error and will abort the script. For example, executing `k6 run --duration 10s --stages 5s:20 script.js` won't work (closes #812). The only exception is combining `duration` and `iterations`, which will result in a `shared-iterations` executor with the specified non-default `maxDuration` (#1058).

Author: Done in 52a5df64.
